\textbf{AI for science: an emerging agenda}

\emph{Working Paper from: Bridging Data-driven and Mechanistic Modelling
{[}Dagstuhl 22382{]}}

\hypertarget{summary}{%
\section{Summary}\label{summary}}

\include{summary.tex}
\hypertarget{contents}{%
\section{Contents}\label{contents}}

\protect\hyperlink{summary}{Summary \protect\hyperlink{summary}{1}}

\protect\hyperlink{_Toc121762019}{Contents
\protect\hyperlink{_Toc121762019}{3}}

\protect\hyperlink{introduction-bridging-data-driven-and-mechanistic-modelling}{Introduction:
bridging data driven and mechanistic modelling
\protect\hyperlink{introduction-bridging-data-driven-and-mechanistic-modelling}{4}}

\protect\hyperlink{snapshots-of-ai-in-science}{Snapshots of AI in
science \protect\hyperlink{snapshots-of-ai-in-science}{6}}

\protect\hyperlink{in-earth-sciences}{In Earth Sciences
\protect\hyperlink{in-earth-sciences}{6}}

\protect\hyperlink{in-environmental-and-agricultural-sciences}{In
environmental and agricultural sciences
\protect\hyperlink{in-environmental-and-agricultural-sciences}{8}}

\protect\hyperlink{in-physical-sciences}{In physical sciences 9}

\protect\hyperlink{section}{In biological sciences 11}

\protect\hyperlink{building-effective-simulations}{Building effective
simulations 15}

\protect\hyperlink{moving-upstream}{Moving upstream 15}

\protect\hyperlink{nurturing-a-diversity-of-approaches}{Nurturing a
diversity of approaches 15}

\protect\hyperlink{truth-truthiness-and-interfacing-with-the-real-world}{Truth,
truthiness, and interfacing with the real world 16}

\protect\hyperlink{connecting-simulation-to-practice}{Connecting
simulation to practice 16}

\protect\hyperlink{directions}{Directions 17}

\protect\hyperlink{connecting-data-to-causality}{Connecting data to
causality 20}

\protect\hyperlink{causality-in-science-and-data}{Causality in science
and data 20}

\protect\hyperlink{causal-models-as-a-route-to-advancing-the-science-of-ai-and-ai-for-science}{Causal
models as a route to advancing the science of AI and AI for science 20}

\protect\hyperlink{from-methods-to-application}{From methods to
application 21}

\protect\hyperlink{directions-1}{Directions 22}

\protect\hyperlink{encoding-domain-knowledge}{Encoding domain knowledge
25}

\protect\hyperlink{wheres-my-science-jetpack}{Where's My {[}Science{]}
Jetpack? 25}

\protect\hyperlink{encoding-domain-knowledge-through-model-design}{Encoding
domain knowledge through model design 25}

\protect\hyperlink{scientific-centaurs}{Scientific centaurs 26}

\protect\hyperlink{enabling-communication-across-domains}{Enabling
communication across domains 27}

\protect\hyperlink{directions-2}{Directions 28}

\protect\hyperlink{a-research-agenda-in-ai-for-science}{A research
agenda in AI for science 32}

\protect\hyperlink{accelerating-progress-in-ai-for-science}{Accelerating
progress in AI for science 34}

\protect\hyperlink{advance-new-methods-and-applications}{Advance new
methods and applications 34}

\protect\hyperlink{invest-in-tools-and-toolkits}{Invest in tools and
toolkits 35}

\protect\hyperlink{build-capability-across-disciplines}{Build capability
across disciplines 35}

\protect\hyperlink{grow-communities-of-research-and-practice}{Grow
communities of research and practice 36}

\protect\hyperlink{ai-and-science-building-the-interface}{AI and
science: building the interface 37}

\protect\hyperlink{annex-1-participants-at-machine-learning-for-science-bridging-data-driven-and-mechanistic-modelling-dagstuhl-seminar-22382-18-23-september-2022}{Annex
1: Participants at Machine Learning for Science: Bridging Data-driven
and Mechanistic Modelling (Dagstuhl Seminar 22382, 18-23 September 2022)
39}

\protect\hyperlink{_Toc121762051}{Annex 2: Research questions arising
from the `AI for science research agenda' discussion during the Dagstuhl
workshop \protect\hyperlink{_Toc121762051}{40}}


\include{introduction-bridging-data-driven-and-mechanistic-modelling}
\include{snapshots-of-ai-in-science}
\include{building-effective-simulations}
\include{connecting-data-and-causality}
\include{encoding-domain-knowledge}
\renewcommand{appendixname}{Annex}
\appendix
\include{participants}
\include{research-questions}
